Configuration
=============

Also see the [tutorial](TUTORIAL.md).


Configuration file location
---------------------------

`pcg` loads the on disk configuration or use the default configuration
if none is found.

In decreasing order of preference:
  - Not checked in: `<repo root>/.git/pre-commit-go.yml`
  - Checked in: `<repo root>/pre-commit-go.yml`
  - User profile:
    - POSIX: `~/.config/pre-commit-go.yml`
    - Windows: `~/pre-commit-go.yml`
  - Default config. You can generate it with `pcg writeconfig`

This permits to override settings of a `pre-commit-go.yml` in a repository by
storing an unversionned one in `.git`.

The `pre-commit-go.yml` name can be overriden on a per call basis via `-c`. If
`-c` specifies an absolute path, it is loaded directly. If it can't be found,
the default configuration is loaded.


Configuration
-------------

The `pre-commit-go.yml` has the following root keys:

  - `min_version` (string): specifies the minimum version of `pcg` that can be
    used with this configuration file. When pcg is too old, it bails out with
    error telling the user to update.
  - `modes` (dict, see below): defines all the checks in all modes.
  - `ignore_patterns` (list of string): defines the files that should be
    ignored. By default, `.*`, `_*` and `*.pb.go` is used which skips files
    mapped in by [godep](https://github.com/tools/godep) (.e.g.
    *Godeps/_workspace*) and source files generated by protobuf compiler
    (protoc-gen-go).

Sample:

```yaml
min_version: 0.4.7
modes:
  (...)
ignore_patterns:
- .*
- _*
- *.pb.go
```


Modes
-----

`pcg` runs on 4 different modes:

  - `pre-commit`: it's the fast tests, e.g. running `go test -short`, `gofmt`,
    etc. Runs checks only on modified files.
  - `pre-push`: the slower checks but still bearable for interactive usage. Runs
    checks only on modified files by what is being pushed.
  - `continuous-integration`: runs all checks. It runs on all files and
    automatically enable verbose mode.
  - `lint`: off-by-default checks. This mode is meant to be run manually for
    checks that trigger false positive by design.

Default checks are meant to be sensible but it can be configured by adding a
`pre-commit-go.yml` configuration file.

Each mode constains a dict of (*check type* : *list of checks with options*).
This means that check type can be run multiple times with different options.
Normally most checks are only specified once per mode.

Sample:

```yaml
modes:
  pre-commit:
    checks:
      build:
      - build_all: true
        extra_args: []
  continuous-integration:
    checks:
      build:
      - build_all: false
        extra_args: []
```


Checks
------

Checks fall in 4 categories:

  - Go native checks that dot not require any external dependency:
    - [go build](https://golang.org/pkg/go/build/) all directories with .go files
      found
    - [go test](https://golang.org/pkg/testing/) with can be used along the [race
      detector](https://blog.golang.org/race-detector)
    - [gofmt](https://golang.org/cmd/gofmt/), especially for the -s flag.
  - Go checks that are external to the Go standard toolset:
    - [go test -cover](https://golang.org/pkg/testing/) with
      [coverage](https://blog.golang.org/cover). It requires an third party only
      when using coveralls.io.
    - [goimports](https://golang.org/x/tools/cmd/goimports)
  - Lint checks (e.g. trigger false positives by design):
    - [errcheck](https://github.com/kisielk/errcheck)
    - [golint](https://github.com/golang/lint)
    - [govet (go tool vet)](https://golang.org/x/tools/cmd/vet)
  - User specified custom checks.


### build

Builds everything inside the current directory similar to `go build ./...`
but only builds the packages without tests. This check is mostly useful for
executables, e.g. `package main`. Packages containing tests are covered via
check `test`.

Use multiple `build` instances to build multiple times with different tags.
It has the following options:

  - `build_all` (bool): forces building every packages. By default, only
    packages without tests are built; packages with tests are assumed to be
    tested so they will be built. The goal here is to ensure that untested code
    compiles at least.
  - `extra_args` (list of string): can be used to build with different tags,
    e.g. to `go build -tags foo,zoo`.

Sample:

```yaml
build:
- build_all: false
  extra_args: []
- build_all: true
  extra_args:
  - tags
  - Debug
```


### copyright

`copyright` enforces that all files have a copyright header. If there are files
that need to be not enforced, add them to the global ignored list. It has the
following options:

  - `header` (string): Header that all files must have.

Sample:

```yaml
copyright:
- header: |-
    // Copyright 2015 YOUR NAME HERE. All rights reserved.
    // Use of this source code is governed under the Apache License, Version 2.0
    // that can be found in the LICENSE file.
```


### coverage

`coverage` runs all tests with coverage. Each testable package is run with `go
test -cover`. It has the following options:

  - `use_global_inference` (bool): determines if coverage from any unit test
    should be considered for coverage calculation for all package.
      - `false` means only the package's unit test is used for coverage
        calculation. Directories with no tests will not be covered at all.
      - `true`  means all test packages are run and all coverage information is
        merged together. This means that package X/Y may create code coverage
        for package X/Z.
  - `use_coveralls` (bool): determines if the data should be sent to
    https://coveralls.io when run on [CI](CI_SETUP.md).
  - `global` (settings): sets global coverage parameters. The whole coverage
    must fit these values. This gives a broad range that the code must maintain.
    This is used when `use_global_inference` is `true`.
  - `per_dir_default"` (settings): is the default coverage settings per package.
    It can be overriden by `per_dir` on a per directory basis. This gives a
    default range each package should adhere to.
  - `per_dir` (settings): defines a list of directories to use different
    coverage value.  The directories must be against the root repository. The
    paths must be in POSIX format, e.g. with `/` as directory element separator.
    The root path is ".". You can disable coverage for a specific directory by
    specifying `null`.

Items marked as `settings` are struct with the following options:

  - `min_coverage` is the minimum test coverage to be generated or the check is
    considered to fail. The value is in percent.
  - `max_coverage` is the maximum test coverage to be generated or the check is
    considered to fail. This is meant to create a *band* to detect when coverage
    increased enough so the values are updated. It is fine to use 100. and be
    done with it. The value is in percent. If 0, the value is not enforced.

Sample:

```yaml
coverage:
- use_global_inference: false
  use_coveralls: true
  global:
    min_coverage: 50
    max_coverage: 90
  per_dir_default:
    min_coverage: 50
    max_coverage: 100
  per_dir: {}
```

### custom

Any number of custom checks can be specified in any mode. A custom check can be
defined by adding a `custom` check in one of the modes.  Here's an example
running `sample-pre-commit-go-custom-check` on the tree in mode
continuous-integration:

```yaml
modes:
  continous-integration:
    checks:
    - check_type: custom
      display_name: sample-pre-commit-go-custom-check
      description: runs sample-pre-commit-go-custom-check on this repository
      command:
      - sample-pre-commit-go-custom-check
      - check
      check_exit_code: true
      prerequisites:
      - help_command:
        - sample-pre-commit-go-custom-check
        - -help
        expected_exit_code: 2
        url: github.com/maruel/pre-commit-go/samples/sample-pre-commit-go-custom-check
```


### errcheck

`errcheck` runs [errcheck](https://github.com/kisielk/errcheck) on all packages.
It has the following options:

  - `ignores` (string): flag to pass to `-ignore`. See `errcheck`'s help
    for more information.

Sample:

```yaml
errcheck:
- ignores: Close
```


### gofmt

`gofmt` runs gofmt in check mode with code simplification enabled. It is almost
redundant with `goimports` except for `-s` which goimports doesn't implement and
gofmt doesn't require any external package. It has no configuration option.
-s is always used.

```yaml
gofmt:
- {}
```

### goimports

`goimports` runs [goimports](https://golang.org/x/tools/cmd/goimports) in check
mode. It has no configuration options.

Sample:

```yaml
goimports:
- {}
```

### golint

`golint` runs [golint](https://github.com/golang/lint). It is a linting tool,
not a check, so it triggers false positives by design. It has the following
options:

  - `blacklist` (list of string): causes this check to ignore the messages
    generated by golint that contain one of the string listed here.

Sample:

```yaml
golint:
- blacklist: []
```


### govet


`govet` runs [go tool vet](https://golang.org/cmd/vet). It is a linting tool,
not a check, so it triggers false positives by design. It has the following
options:

  - `blacklist` (list of string): causes this check to ignore the messages
    generated by govet that contain one of the string listed here.

Sample:

```yaml
govet:
- blacklist:
  - ' composite literal uses unkeyed fields'
```


### test

`test` runs all tests via go test. Use the specialized check `coverage` when
-cover is desired. Use multiple `test` instances to test multiple times with
different flags, like with different tags, with or without the race detector,
etc. It has the following options:

  - `extra_args` (list of string): runs the test with additional arguments like
    -v, -short, -race, etc.

Sample:

```yaml
test:
- extra_args:
  - -v
  - -short
  - -race
- extra_args:
  - -v
```
